an English mathematician came to
Cambridge stood up in front of a lecture
theatre gave three talks over the course
of three days and at the end of the last
talk and I think the audience had
already got there by this stage said and
here it is I've proved Fermat's Last
Theorem the mathematician question was
Sandra Wiles and he'd be working in
secrecy for seven years on trying to
find a proof of Fermat's Last Theorem he
dreamt about finding proof ever since he
was a child and it's an extraordinary
story of childhood ambition adult
obsession working on a proof it that
took him about 200 pages and when he
came here and he announced the proof the
world went wild he was on the front page
of the New York Times he was interviewed
on TV he was everywhere he was the
world's most famous mathematician
because he solved in a fan of proof for
the world's most notorious problem now
that's not quite the end of the story
because when you publish something in
mathematics or when you come up with a
great proof or even a minor proof you
have to have it checked by your
colleagues
it's called peer review and Andrew Wiles
is proof was sent out to seven referees
such a large proof it took seven people
the fact I think even seven pairs of
people to check it line by line by line
and somebody found a mistake and some
suddenly suddenly from being the world's
most famous mathematician he was the
mathematician who made the most famous
blunder I call a blunder but it was a
very subtle mistake from from a very
great mathematician but the long and the
short of it was the proof didn't exist
you know Ness the proof is perfect and
complete it's not worth anything
Angell's desperately tried to fix the
proof he looked to one of his former
students I think Richard Taylor who was
now a very famous mathematician in his
own right and Richard Taylor working
with Andrew Wiles tried to fix the proof
and for a long time it looked like it
wasn't fixed
I remember one mathematician described
it's trying to fit a carpet in the room
where the carpets too big so you get the
carpet to fit in this corner and it pops
up in that corner
you fix that calling it pops up there so
whatever they were doing it didn't work
but eventually it's a story with a happy
ending because eventually I'm wild and
Taylor found a fix and it must have been
a year of torture for Andrew Wiles but
but eventually he found they found the
complete proof it was checked again this
time there were no problems it's been
published and now we have the end of an
extraordinary 350 year old story the
only bit of the story that we haven't
really finished is and who was it proof
is clearly not what Pierre de filma had
in mind
ferma couldn't have come up with the
proof the wowsers it's published because
was his proof is full of very modern
mathematics full of mathematics that he
himself invented firma could never have
conceived of that kind of proof
so maybe firm I made a mistake I think
that's probably the most likely art so
firm I thought he had approved but he
didn't or maybe he really did
maybe Pierre FMR came up with a proof
that uses 17th century techniques
relatively simple techniques but put
together in an incredibly clever way so
clever that nobody's ever found faramarz
original proof so if you're not busy
this evening you might want to go back
and try and find the fair Mars original
proof I'll leave you with that
you